Thank you. Warm greetings again, friends. Thank you. We'll begin as we always begin and reactivate
our bodhichitta. This is the one thing that we always, it's kind of the essential point
of Dharma. So it's the answer, really honestly, the answer to every question is bodhichitta.
And then it's just a matter of unpacking how that's true. So with that kind of very clear
understanding, the exceptional importance of bodhichitta will all just kind of activate
that heart and mind of enlightenment, the genuine concern and care for all beings, and
the wish that what we're doing right now becomes the immediate direct cause of every being's
happiness and their enlightenment.
Thank you. So the kind of theme that I was kind of orienting around the past couple days
for this specific time together was painting a fuller picture. So painting a fuller picture.
And then specifically, I was thinking about painting a fuller picture of ourselves, and
then also a fuller picture of Dharma. And then I think specifically as I was looking
at it and kind of feeling through it, and it was more kind of emphasized the fuller
picture of oneself, of me. And I think one way to put this or one way I've thought of
it is just we all have these many selves. We all have a plurality of selves. We take different
roles. We have different moods. We show up in different ways at different times. We have
different talents that come out, different limitations that we have, different ways we
get stuck at certain times. We have the sleepy me and the anxious me and the excited me and
the relaxed me and the Dharma me and the non-Dharma me and the friendly version of me. And we
have all these aspects to ourselves. So it's kind of how do we actually kind of lean into
really like allowing them to be there more fully, have a fuller sense of self, of me.
So to allow for a more plurality of selves. And then specifically related to this point,
many of us know like no self is such a key essential Dharma teaching and the foundational
teachings of the Buddha Shakyamuni. And I think the way that I understand this some is it's
no fixed self. There's no fixed me. There's no one me. There's no essential identity that
is me. There's no one way I am. I'm a fluid. Like everything is fluid. It's interdependent.
It's dependently arisen. And we all are and we keep changing. And this is something that
is like kind of a common understanding in one way, but it's so deep. I mean, they say
to really understand interdependence is to understand emptiness. To understand emptiness
is to actually achieve freedom. So how can we allow for a greater plurality of selves,
a greater flexibility of selves. And two things that kind of came to mind with this for myself
as I was kind of going through this a little bit is, and this is I thought of like some
little points that have helped me and also kind of came to mind. One is like we're all
human. The humanness of me. Right. We have to allow that to be a part of this process
of Dharma. I'm a human being. The humanness. I have all kinds of limitations and prejudices
and preferences and beautiful things and things I don't want to be aware of and things that
I shy away from, but they're part of me. And it's just because I'm human and we're all
just human. And so that's one side humanness. We all have limitations. We are relative beings
or limited. And then on the other side, we all have an unlimited nature. And the Buddha
taught this so clearly and all the teachings in Buddhism, like really come to this point
that we all have this unlimited, unrestricted, inherently flexible capacity to allow for
anything to happen. Like it's totally accommodating. This awareness that's utterly flexible and
free that we all have this unlimited awareness, this unlimited intelligence and this goodness
that is bodhicitta. That is the Buddha nature. So in thinking about or like feeling through
like this really a plurality of selves or like allowing myself to show up in like different
ways, depending on what's happening in my experience and who's around me and what's
helpful now and what's not. These are two things that I always have to kind of keep
checking in on. Like they're two things that help me to not get so lost down kind of in
some kind of fixation, some kind of holding too tightly is that I'm a human being with
limitations that I'm human. And two, I have an unlimited nature that goes beyond any kind
of identity or sense of me that I could ever conceive of or ever feel or ever imagine.
I mean, it's really inconceivable. And these two aspects are always at play. They're always
part of the nature of relative interdependence. And so that's two things. If we like allow
ourselves to have both those sides or both those aspects to kind of, you know, to show
up in one way as we are, but not be totally defined by those roles we take because then
we're fixating on a certain me. And also to like, you know, to really check in and like
the main point is to come to experience this unlimited nature that we all have, this utterly
flexible. It's the no fixed part of the no self. It's like unfixed or flexible. And we
have both of these aspects. So in terms of the ways of actually like fully engaging with
the Dharma, I think that's really important to allow ourselves to have both those things.
Because if we cut out the human part, then we're all just pretending. And if we cut out
the unlimited nature part, then it gets so tight, so fast. And it's just too serious.
And there's no levity. And there's no like tenderness to it. It's just so tense. Always
just freedom, freedom, freedom, breakthrough, breakthrough, breakthrough. On the other side
of it's all just like my feeling right now and what's in my body right now. And what
happened to me last week and those, we have to care about those. But if we get too wrapped
around those two, then we lose the bigger perspective. We don't allow ourselves more
room to change. We constantly circle around a certain story, a certain set of identities,
a certain kind of set of me's. And that's so limited compared to like actually our unlimited
nature. And so then we go to look at the Dharma with this. How is the Dharma is not, you know,
we can really think of it as a plurality of dharmas. It's always Buddhisms. It's always
multiple. There's not just one Buddhism. It's Buddhisms. And we've heard this so many times
and it's such a, in one way, kind of obvious teaching because it's been repeated so much.
But there's so many yanas and there's so many techniques and there's all these vehicles
and there's all these views. And there's all these ways that we engage the views with meditation
and with our behavior and conduct. And we get a certain very specific result or fruition
that corresponds with that sequence of view, meditation, conduct and fruition. But the
Dharma itself is so flexible. And it's almost like we've talked about this and we've heard
teachings about this so much that it's almost like we don't really have to say more because
it's so, there's just so many teachings on this foundational Buddhism and Sutra Mahayana
Buddhism and Tantra Mahayana Buddhism and Zogchen and all these lineages and all the
ways that we can like release our holding. There's so many ways and they always have
to correspond to the way we're holding, the way we're stuck. And that's where the plurality
of dharmas, the multiplicity of dharmas, the really infinite ways that the Dharma expresses
itself and the unlimited ways that the Buddha so kindly taught us to help us get free of
our holding, our fixation, our fear to be a little more inclusive, a little more open.
So there's so many ways that the Buddha so kindly pointed out how we can do this to relax
certain kind of grasping. But it's always related to the type of grasping we actually
are happening, that's happening with us right now. It's not related to someone else's grasping
or to my grasping five years ago. It's always where we work, where we apply the teaching
is always right now. And that's where the plurality of selves and the plurality of Dharma,
the flexibility of self, the flexibility of mind, the flexibility of the teachings to
have a more open mind, that's where they come together in what actually helps right now.
So how am I showing up right now? How does the Dharma like meet that like a medicine or
like a kind friend or like a, you know, there's all kinds of ways that we can release our
tension, our fixation, our kind of limited ways of just holding in a set kind of pattern.
And it always comes down to right now, this present moment. So I thought I was thinking,
what are some ways, you know, if they're all these selves and each of us are just, we're
so rich, we're so kind of, it's extraordinary how diverse we are, each of us. And it's
extraordinary
how multifaceted the Dharma is, the teachings of the Buddha. So like what are some ways
that we can like let ourselves keep coming back to these points to let ourselves be human
and be unlimited and to meet the Dharma in this present moment in a way that really kind
of like lines up and helps us open, helps us release, helps us relax just a little more.
And the one point I came to and this isn't like in a systematic way, but was just digestion.
Contemplation is digestion. Venerable Kempo Sowendong and Rinpoche talks about it often
as absorbing the teachings. It really takes time to absorb these teachings. It takes long
time and it's so rewarding and it's so valuable and so worth it. And I'm sure all always in
our visualizations, the Buddhas are just rejoicing that we're doing this process, that we're
engaging on the path. They're always so happy. You know, it's never we visualize the Guru
Rinpoche in the sky above scowling at us saying you're so bad. How can you do this wrong?
Your visualization is so horrible. Would you do that yesterday and all that? They always
look with such kindness and such love. Like it's like an only child, like, oh, you're
doing it, you know. Keep going. There's this whole kind. And it just takes time. It takes
time to digest things. It takes time to absorb the Dharma. It takes time to release these
habits. That's a really, it's just good for myself to keep coming back to that. This is
a long process and it's so rewarding and worth it. Every, every step into opening to become
a little more flexible, a little more attentive to others, like it's only going to be beneficial.
But the process is sticky because our habits are sticky. You know, otherwise they would
just dissolve and disappear. The habits would be gone, you know, but even if in Vajrasattva
purifies us entirely, then, you know, the habits just pop back on. We're like totally
relieved of all the habits we recognize and release and we're in our unlimited nature.
And then we get sleepy or we just think a thought comes and emotion comes and then they
all just line up again. Our, our fixation is really sticky. And so many things out there
are very sticky and they're asking us to stick more, you know, grab me, look at me, watch
me, use me, eat me, buy me, stay with me, engage with me. They're wanting to just draw
us in, draw us in, draw us in. So it's a, it's a very kind of involved process to just
relax and be like, oh, I see that happening. I see the invitation, but no, thank you. It's
okay. I'm good. I'm going to kind of rest with what's happening right now and not immediately
kind of grab onto the yummy treat or whatever it is, push away the really scary thing. So
that's what we're practicing in meditation to let what's happening happen. And then it
changes and then it becomes a different thing and then let that happen. And it just keeps
changing. And so then that's kind of the practice we keep kind of like letting all this multipl
icity
kind of happen. The waves come and the waves go, and that's just the path. So we should
kind of allow, it's good to know that's, you know, that's what's going to happen. It can
be a good just heads up to see that. And if that keeps happening, then good. Then we just,
as long as we keep relaxing and kind of keep getting a little more tender, more soft, more
clear, then just keep at it. And because this process takes a long time, then a second point
I thought is we really need protection. These habits are so sticky. We need to be really
practical in creating really a safe space around us in our environment, in our minds
that really help us keep this digestion process happening. We really need these, whatever
you call it, boundaries or a space that we go to, that we do these certain type of activities
like meditation or studying Dharma, like retreat hermitages or a little spot in your home where
you just doing this process of meditating, that we need this protection. We need the
protection circles in Vajrayana Buddhism. It's always part of the sadhana practice. Our
shamatha, we need these containers because it's really like we've said before, baby bodhicitta,
baby rigpa, it's just little babies, you know, we need all these supports. They're just supports
and they're secondary supports. We don't have to have them always forever. They change as
our own emotions change, as our experience changes, but we require them all the way on
the path until we're actually totally free and we can actually not kind of lock onto
anything that comes up on our radar. We can see it clearly and not lock onto it. Then
they said these are totally free beings, you know, these beings on the boomies or they're
enlightened beings. But until then we need these secondary supports. That's very practical
and that's just essential on the path. That is the path. How do we use these secondary
supports that really help us protect this baby bodhicitta, this really genuine good intention?
What actually helps me in this moment line up with the dharma in a way that like my heart
opens a little more, I soften a little bit. I really get a more enthusiasm to practice,
to actually connect, to be kind, to listen. Those are all secondary supports. We need
that protection. This refuge, we need this. There's just no way around it. If we try to
talk around it, it's just talk because we're humans with unlimited nature. We're not just
unlimited. We have all these limited human habits that come up that are part of our experience
all the time and we need ways of releasing them. These are the supports we use, protection.
That's a kind of a, like a point that kind of came to mind with that for me is this vulnerability.
You're really fickle, you know? The mind is fickle. I'm really fickle and that's really
the greatest superpower we have. I can be influenced. I can be moved. I can experience
something and it can open me and it can make, it can just make this soft, tender, like really
curious, engaged experience because I can be influenced, because I'm not locked away
in a fortress, you know? Like being vulnerable, letting life affect you. That's such an
extraordinary
superpower. If we didn't have that, we would really, we wouldn't be relational beings.
We would just be frozen and stuck. And on the flip side of that, vulnerability is really
the greatest weakness too, because we can be influenced. And so many things out there
are not, they're not encouraging goodness and bodhicitta and loving attention and a
sense of gratitude and confidence and inner courage and courageousness and follow through
and rigorous kind of analytic investigation. Like so much is not encouraging that at all.
So we have to be really discerning here. That's like where this discerning intelligence is
so important. Being open, being tender, being able to be moved by experience. But having
really discerning intelligence of what is moving me in a way that's away from Dharma,
it's away from my nature, it's closing me away from my unlimited potential. It's not
a secondary support, it's a primary obstacle. We really have to discern that and we have
to ask for help too, because a lot of that's really quiet, subtle stuff that we can't see
ourselves doing. So we need these Sangha members, community members, we need these teachers.
They'll help point these things out to us before we make too big of a mess with them
and we believe in these obstacles too much. So this vulnerability is so key, but we have
to be really discerning with it. We need to be open and share and willing to authentically
show up in a really kind of touched way, like a sincere way. But we also need to be real
careful about who we're doing that with. What's the context? Because sometimes people won't
use that for our benefit. They'll use it to take advantage. So this is not bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta is not doormat compassion, as Venerable Shogym Trung Purimhiche said so many times.
We're trying to be tender-hearted because it's just a tender experience to be alive.
It's so wounding. It's so wounded. Like it's all suffering, you know. We can be influenced.
It's uncertain. So it's so vulnerable. It's like, really? We never have enough clothes
for the wind to be released, for us to be really totally everything's completely perfect.
There's always some little crack in there that makes it not so comfortable, you know?
Like the sick person in a bed that can't really get in the right position that Great Master
Long Champa said. It's just always like that. And because it's not always perfect, that
really helps us. That's the opportunity. That's like the superpower of vulnerability. "Oh,
how can I use this as an experience to open my mind? Because it's not really the way I
want it. Oh, how can I use that to actually develop more compassion?" Then this becomes
a great opportunity. "How do we bring this plurality of me, of selves, and the plurality
of Dharma together?" Definitely the main question that comes to my mind is like on the Bodhisattva
path is what actually serves others right now? That really brings everything to a point.
What's actually helpful right now? So it's not which self do I want to show up with right
now in one way? And which Dharma path do I want to bring right now? It's like actually
in this situation with this person or in this circumstance or with my mind, what actually
helps me connect with my unlimited nature? And in a way that lets me be an embodied being
that's relating with experience? What serves? And I thought this, if we don't know what
serves, because life's so complicated, there's so many things at play. Relationships are
very sticky too. If we can't figure out immediately with a lot of clarity what serves right now,
what is most helpful? We can just express love. Just love. Our own Buddha nature just
knows that. If we're being loved, someone's appreciating us, our Buddha nature just opens.
There's a big doorway here with vulnerability and grief. And it's good, I wanted to say,
I thought as part of this I really wanted to thank everyone. Some of you may know, my
mom passed away a couple weeks ago. And it's really, it's just heartbreaking. And so many
people, there's been such an outpouring of like so much support and love, love for her,
love for me, love for my family, and it's been just, I mean, I just couldn't ask for
more. And it's like some person you, I mean, just love so much. I love my mom so much.
And what do you say, you know? What do you say when you lose, when someone you care about
lose something that's so cherished to them? I just love them. It's become really clear
in my mind. Perfectly, not perfectly clear, but clear, you know? You know, sometimes we
don't have the right words. We don't know what to say. We don't, we're going to stumble
and make a mess and make mistakes, but it's just if we come from a place of love, like
really concerned, oh really, it's so tough. This is so hard. Life is so hard. It's so hard
to be a human being. I know that. We feel that ourselves, we go through things. Oh, it's
just so hard sometimes. And then we just love. Oh, I just, I love you. I mean, that's always
never going to be wrong. So if we can't really clearly know, oh, what really is going to
help now. Really, we don't have that skill yet. We can just connect to our bodhicitta
and just turn it on, you know? Oh, I just love you, you know? I love compassion, really.
This is so tough being a human being. It's so tough. All the Buddhas said, it's so much
in my mind. How much we've cried over the loved ones we've lost in the past, it feels
more than the oceans, our tears. Oh, how we've done this so much. How we've lost things we've
loved and just really first noble truth, you know? And that's where things like grieving,
it's like such a big doorway. Just a tiny little taste of that now. We're really all
very vulnerable beings. This human condition we're in is so vulnerable. And it's that way
for all of us. We all have this suffering. It's just uncertain. Life is uncertain. And
in that way, this, that process, that vulnerability, it can be really like such a way to connect
to others. We're all in the same situation. Wow, it's made so tender. And then the little
kind of scary element of it is, oh, my suffering is just, we can kind of wrap ourselves. I
really have a sense of that a little more than before. Oh, this suffering I can't bear,
you know? This grief is so big, I can't bear it. And my body just goes into these mows or
all these things are coming up. All this sadness and just like, really, it's like this creature
I'm like, well, I'm getting to watch. It is in one way funny, but also it's just like,
I can't do anything about it. And it's just also beautiful. Like, wow, this vehicle that's
just like designed to, you know, to like care for things and be sad about losing them and
having gratitude. Like I didn't have to do anything for it, you know, and my conscious
mind I didn't have to do anything to get this body. And then there's all these teachings
about past lives. This is such an extraordinary vehicle each of us have. And we've done many,
many good things to produce such a good result. There's more things to say, but we're all
in this very kind of a, whether we like it or not, it's all a very liminal, fluid, flexible
space, just being a human being. And it's just not going to turn out the way we want
it almost ever. Sometimes we get lucky and it keeps going, we get in a good flow. But
it's not really like it lines up according to all of our checklists. It's actually that
our mind softens and then we actually start working with what's happening. And then it's
like, Oh, this isn't so bad. And then these great beings, they check in and they get so
flexible with the nature that they really always are meeting the situation in this present
moment with such finesse and such elegance and such power and strength and clarity. It's
just so fine tuned and so willing to move as it needs to move as life moves. They're
so moved by it and they're really willing to meet it right on the dot. And that's where
this plurality of selves and plurality of Dharma avoids just like anything goes pluralism.
It avoids the extreme of extreme relativism. When we're talking about like no fixed self,
it doesn't mean infinite selves. It's really highlighting the unlimited nature that we
all have in that experience. It's just part of being a nested being in, in life. It's,
everything's connected. The plurality is pointing to like the openness of mind, the utter
flexibility
of bodhicitta. And then we can show up in any way that's helpful. And it won't be the specific
way of me that I like the best. It'll be the way that's really helpful right now. And we've
seen that with these great bodhisattvas and we've seen that with Buddha and we've seen
that with all these Buddhas and that's what they do. They keep showing up in all these
varieties of ways and we're training ourselves to follow in their footsteps, to be that flexible,
to show up with two arms or four arms or this color or to show up as a sound or to show
up as a memory or like, you know, people have a friend who like really is just so amazing.
And Chantideva, way of the bodhisattva, may I be a boat, may I be a bridge, may I be a
refreshing breeze, may I be medicine, may I be ambrosia, anything that serves other beings.
And this friend literally thinks of herself as being a bridge that all these Indian beings
can walk across to get to the other shore. It's so wonderful, that deep level of service.
Like you really care that much that like, may I be whatever is necessary to be the balm
that soothes the pain for any being. Such a heart wish. So just extraordinary to be in
the company of people like that and it's just so refreshing to be at the feet of these great
masters that are that way all the time and to be in a community of practitioners and
to be also just a vulnerable human being, part of this vulnerable wounded experience
and like really to use that as a way to like really let this kind of diversity of experience
like kind of manifest and like unfurl and let the waves of kind of experience and mind
to keep happening without getting kind of drowned in them. But like kind of let them
kind of lift us up and let us really support us. Let the diversity actually keep pointing
out to like that flexibility, the openness of mind. And that's where all this flexibility
of Dharma and the flexibility of self, it all comes to that point. And then that openness
of mind, the spaciousness quality of mind that's inconceivable, can't be put into any
kind of fixed category, really beyond any kind of fabrication designation, any kind
of holding pattern. It's completely beyond all those holding patterns. Then that open
freedom can express itself in an infinite variety of ways as the Buddha taught as this
Vajrayana teachings and as Tantramayana is like really renowned for doing the infinite
variety of ways of skillful means of connecting with others and communicating in helpful ways
with bodhicitta. So that's the main point. Using the tenderness to actually connect with
the unlimited nature. We're tender and exposed. We can be influenced and moved. And we want
to be, we're underwhelmed in a lot of ways. It's not just overwhelming life, overwhelming.
We're overwhelmed with stuff that doesn't really feed us well. It doesn't bring much
nourishment. But we want to be in awe. We want to have the magical, mysterious experience
where we're just grateful and we're just like showing up and the simplicity becomes breathtaking.
We all want to be moved like that. And that openness of mind that actually that's what
it introduces such an open state of mind that's so freshly engaged and so simple. So may it
be so. And we keep using these practices to reintroduce that same openness in our own
awareness and then to like really accommodate other beings within that spaciousness like
in whatever way really serves them to have them be more open and more loving to themselves
and loving to others. And there's a bodhisattva path. And that's the Vajrayana kind of essential
point. The heart bodhicitta really is the answer of all these questions. And this is
just one way to kind of unpack that a little bit. So thank you all. Really love you. Love
you. Love you. Thank you.